Add VE use case docs (#8933)
mendix/docs: content/en/docs/refguide/modeling/domain-model/entities/view-entities/view-entity-overview-pages.md

---
title: "Creating Overview Pages"
url: /refguide/view-entity-overview-pages/

---

## Introduction

Use view entities to show data across multiple associated entities.

For this purpose of this use case, the following domain model is used:

> {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/domain-model/view-entities/create-overview-pages/domain-model.png" >}}

Reviewer: I think it would help to have the current images here, even if they need to be updated later.

It might also be useful to have a quick description of the domain model (for accessibility reasons) - although I don't think we need to list all the attributes since we are assuming that people will be quite experienced..

---
title: "Creating Overview Pages"
url: /refguide/view-entity-overview-pages/

---

## Introduction

> Use view entities to show data across multiple associated entities.

Reviewer: Perhaps a little more information - not absolutely necessary but this feels a little short for something which I think will be the most used document in this section.

For this purpose of this use case, the following domain model is used:

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/domain-model/view-entities/create-overview-pages/domain-model.png" >}}

{{% alert color="info" %}}

> You must have an existing data grid with data inputted into it prior to using a view entity. Do this by generating overview pages using the entities in the above domain model, then adding sample data into it. 

Reviewer: Probably better to talk about the database rather than the grid? Perhaps something like
```suggestion
You must have a database containing data prior to using a view entity. Do this by generating overview pages using the entities in the above domain model, then adding sample data. 
```

{{% /alert %}}

## Create a Data Grid 

> In this scenario, create an overview page that lists each product in a [data grid]( /appstore/modules/data-grid-2/), including information about its category and supplier. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this scenario, you will create an overview page that lists each product in a [data grid]( /appstore/modules/data-grid-2/), including information about its category and supplier. 
```

With view entities, you do not have to manage associations when showing the data in a data grid. This means that all fields are filterable and sortable, which allows for higher performance and flexibility.

Create a view entity that combines only the relevant attributes of the entities *Product*, *Supplier*, and *Category*. To do this, follow these steps:

1. Open your domain model and add a new view entity.
2. Name the view entity *ProductOverviewVE*.
3. Add the following query to the OQL editor: 

    ```sql
    SELECT
      p.ProductId as ProductId,
      p.ProductName as ProductName,
      p.QuantityPerUnit as QuantityPerUnit,
      p.Discontinued as Discontinued,
      s.CompanyName as Supplier, 
      c.CategoryName as Category
    FROM Shop.Product as p
      JOIN p/Shop.Product_Supplier/Shop.Supplier as s
      JOIN p/Shop.Product_Category/Shop.Category as c

>     ```

Reviewer: Perhaps explain what this does, for anyone who is new to OQL.

It takes those four attributes of each product and combines them with the associated supplier and category.

Perhaps also note what we found - that if there is no supplier or category then the product will not be included. You may want to link to [`JOIN`](/refguide/oql-clauses/#join) which will be published in #8431.

4. Click OK. The view entity is added to your domain model.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/domain-model/view-entities/create-overview-pages/product-overview-ve.png" >}}

> 5. Generate an overview page by right-clicking the view entity > **Generate overview pages**.

Reviewer: Perhaps remind the reader to add this page to the navigation or home page?

6. Run your app locally, then click **View App**. You should see the data grid populated with the information that was previously added.

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/domain-model/view-entities/create-overview-pages/ live-data-grid.png" >}}

{{% alert color="info" %}}

> In the new data grid created by  *ProductOverviewVE*, the **Edit** buttons is not functional. You can hide or remote this button, or follow the steps below to [update the product microflow](#update-microflow) or [add a new product](#add-product) to the grid.

Reviewer: I don't think we should link to the "add a new product" here as it isn't relevant to the edit button.

```suggestion
In the new data grid created by  *ProductOverviewVE*, the **Edit** buttons is not functional. You can hide or remove this button, or follow the steps below to [update underlying persistent entities](#update-underlying-persistent-entities).
```

{{% /alert %}}

## Alternative to Calculated Attributes

> You can use view entities to search and sort items, as well as receive the calculated attribute (or Total Value). This is only calculated once, unlike a non-persistable entity, where it is calculated each time the object is accessed. 

Reviewer: I would probably say "hold" here, as it is held in a view attribute?
```suggestion
You can use view entities to search and sort items, as well as hold the calculated attribute (or Total Value). This is only calculated once, unlike a non-persistable entity, where it is calculated each time the object is accessed. 
```

For example, the *OrderLine* entity represents a single entry in an order. It has the following attributes:

* `UnitPrice`
* `Quantity`
* `Discount`

### Get Total Value

> Suppose you want to get the total value of each order line, which is given by the formula `Total = UnitPrice * Quantity* (1 – Discount)`. To do this, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose you want to get the total value of each order line, which is given by the formula `Total = UnitPrice * Quantity * (1 – Discount)`. To do this, follow these steps:
```

1. Create a view entity and name it *OrderLineWithTotalVE*.
2. Add the following query to the OQL editor:

    ```sql
    SELECT
      ol.OrderLineId as OrderLineId,
      ol.Quantity as Quantity,
      ol.UnitPrice as UnitPrice,
      ol.Discount as Discount,
      (ol.Quantity * ol.UnitPrice * (1 - ol.Discount)) as Total
    FROM Shop.OrderLine ol
    ```

3. Generate an overview page by right-clicking the view entity > **Generate overview pages**.

> 4. Run your app locally, then click **View App**. Use this view entity in a data grid to show the total value.

Reviewer: You did this in the previous step by generating the page?
```suggestion
4. Add the new overview page to the navigation and view it running locally.
```

{{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/domain-model/view-entities/create-overview-pages/total-value.png" >}}

### Join OrderLine and Order Entities

> Calculate the total value of an order by joining the `OrderLine` and `Order`tables. To do this, follow the steps below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can calculate the total value of an order by joining the `OrderLine` and `Order`tables. To do this, follow the steps below:
```

1. Create a new view entity and name it *OrderWithTotalValueVE*.
2. Add the following query to the OQL editor: 

    ```sql
    SELECT
      o.OrderId as OrderId,
      o.OrderDate as OrderDate,
      o.RequiredDate as RequiredDate,
      o.ShippedDate as ShippedDate,
      SUM(ol.UnitPrice * ol.Quantity * (1 - ol.Discount)) as TotalOrderValue,
      SUM(ol.Quantity) as TotalProductCount,
      COUNT(*) as UniqueProductCount
    FROM Shop."Order" as o
      JOIN o/Shop.OrderLine_Order/Shop.OrderLine as ol
    GROUP BY o.OrderId, o.OrderDate, o.RequiredDate, o.ShippedDate
    ```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    This results in a view entity that shows the total value of every order.

```

3. Generate an overview page by right-clicking the view entity > **Generate overview pages**.

> 4. Run your app locally, then click **View App**. This results in a view entity that shows the total value of every order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Add the new overview page to the navigation and view it running locally.
```

{{% alert color="info" %}} 
Notice the quotation marks in `Shop.”Order”`. This is because `Order` is a reserved keyword in OQL. To avoid ambiguity, quotation marks are put around the word. 

> {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer: Perhaps put this after step 2 so it is closer to where it applies?

## Update Underlying Persistent Entities

> On the Product overview page above, there is no button to add or modify a product. This can be added to a view entity to update its corresponding persistable entity object.

Reviewer: There is (probably) a button but it doesn't work.

And I think we need to say that _this functionality_ is added to the view entity - otherwise it looks like something we have to add to the domain model?

> 1. Create a microflow and name it *ACT_UpdateProduct*. This microflow takes the `ProductOverviewVE` object.

Reviewer: "This microflow takes the `ProductOverviewVE` object." is what you do in the next step, so I don't think we need it here as well.
```suggestion
1. Create a microflow and name it *ACT_UpdateProduct*.
```

2. Add a parameter and in the entity field, select *ProductOverviewVE*.

> 3. Add a [retrieve]( /refguide/retrieve/) activity. In this activity, retrieve a *Product* object from the database. Configure the activity with the following details: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Add a [retrieve](/refguide/retrieve/) activity. In this activity, retrieve a *Product* object from the database. Configure the activity with the following details: 
```

    * Use the following XPath constraint:

        ```
        [(ProductId = $ProductOverviewVE/ProductId)]
        ```

    * In the Options field, set Range to **First** 
  
4. Add a [Change Object]( /refguide/change-object/) activity. Configure the activity with the following details: 

    * Add the attributes of `Product` to reflect those of `ProductOverviewVE` 

>     * In the Options field, set Range to **First** 

Reviewer: Don't think this applies to the Change Object?

    * In the Commit field, select **Yes**

    {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/domain-model/view-entities/create-overview-pages/product-overview-microflow.png" >}}
  
5. Open the ProductOverviewVE_NewEdit page that was generated by *ProductOverviewVE*.
6. Remove the Product ID, Supplier, and Category fields.
7. Double-click the **Save** button and in the On click field, select **Call a microflow**.
8. Under Microflow, click **Select** > A**CT_UpdateProduct**. 
9. Click **OK**.
10. Open the ProductOverviewVE_Overview page.
11. Add a new custom column on the far right of the data grid.
12. Add a button to this new column.

> 13. Link this button to the ProductOverviewVE_NewEdit page. 

Reviewer: Only need to do that if a button wasn't added by the "generate overview" function. When we tried it, we seemed to have a button there already (although it didn't work).

Once these steps are complete, run your app locally and test the functionality.

## Update Associated Product Category and Supplier

Add the capability to update a product’s associated category and supplier. To do this, follow these steps:

1. Open your domain model and double-click **ProductOverviewVE**.

> 2. Add `CategoryId` and `SupplierId` by adding the following query in the OQL editor:

Reviewer: I would avoid "add" here as the reader might think this is in addition to what is already there. Perhaps "using" instead?
```suggestion
2. Add `CategoryId` and `SupplierId` by using the following query in the OQL editor:
```

    ```sql
    SELECT
      p.ProductId as ProductId,
      p.ProductName as ProductName,
      p.QuantityPerUnit as QuantityPerUnit,
      p.Discontinued as Discontinued,
      s.CompanyName as Supplier,
      c.CategoryName as Category,
      s.SupplierId as SupplierId,
      c.CategoryId as CategoryId
    FROM Shop.Product as p
      JOIN p/Shop.Product_Supplier/Shop.Supplier as s
      JOIN p/Shop.Product_Category/Shop.Category as c
    ```

3. Create two more view entities that retrieve ID and names from the Supplier and Category tables. Name these view entities *SupplierNamesVE* and *CategoryNamesVE*.

> 4. Add the following queries into the OQL editor. Add one to each entity:

Reviewer: Perhaps combine these into one step as the OQL in step 4 is really associated with the two new entities in step 3.

    ```sql
    SELECT
      s.SupplierId as SupplierId,
      s.CompanyName as SupplierName
    FROM Shop.Supplier s
    ```

    ```sql
    SELECT
      c.CategoryId as CategoryId,
      c.CategoryName as CategoryName
    FROM Shop.Category c
    ```

    {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/domain-model/view-entities/create-overview-pages/supplier-and-category-ve.png" >}}

5. On the ProductOverviewVE_NewEdit page, add a Combo box inside the data view. Include the following information:

    * In the Data source field, select **Database**
    * Under Selectable objects, click **Edit** > **Entity (path)** > **CategoryNamesVE** > **Select**
    * Under Target attribute, select **Category**
    * Under Caption, select **CategoryNames**

    {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/modeling/domain-model/view-entities/combo-box.png" >}}

6. Add another Combo box and repeat the above steps for *SupplierNameVE* entity. 

> The final form should look like this:

Reviewer: Perhaps not "form" but "page" or "data view", depending on what is in the image.
